First draft for the GRASS 8.3.0 news (#372)
OSGeo/grass-website: content/news/2023_06_11_GRASS_GIS_8_3_RC1_released.md

---

> title: "First release candidate for GRASS GIS 8.3 is out"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "GRASS GIS 8.3.0 released"
```

> date: 2023-06-11T12:42:00-03:00

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2023-06-24T12:42:00-03:00
```

layout: "news"
author: GRASS Development Team
---

### What's new in a nutshell

> The GRASS GIS 8.3.0RC1 release provides more than 360 improvements 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The GRASS GIS 8.3.0 release provides more than 360 improvements 
```

> and fixes with respect to the 8.2 branch. This new minor release

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and fixes compared to the 8.2 branch. This new minor release
```

brings in many fixes and improvements in GRASS GIS modules and the
graphical user interface (GUI) which now has the 
**single window layout by default**. 
Some of the most relevant changes include: support for parallelization

> in three raster modules, new options added to different temporal modules, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in three raster modules, new options added to several temporal modules, 
```

> and substantial clean-up of g.extension, the module alowing to install 
> addons. The GUI also received a lot of attention with many fixes and 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and substantial clean-up of `g.extension`, the module that allows the installation
of add-ons. The GUI also received a lot of attention with many fixes and 
```

> items being re-organized.
> Furthermore, we have adopted Clang-Format and indented most of C code 
> accordingly. A lot of effort has been put in cleaning up of C/C++ code 
> to fix almost all compiler warnings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
items reorganised.
We have also adopted the Clang format and indented most of the C code
accordingly. A lot of effort was put into cleaning up the C/C++ code
to fix almost all compiler warnings.
```

> Tanslations were moved from Transifex to 
> [Weblate](https://weblate.osgeo.org/projects/grass-gis/), that 
> automatically creates pull requests with the translated chunks. 
> We'd like to thank translators of all languages for your long-term 
> support!! 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Translations have been moved from Transifex to
[Weblate](https://weblate.osgeo.org/projects/grass-gis/), which
automatically creates pull requests with the translated chunks.
We'd like to thank the translators of all languages for their
long term support!
```

> Also, docker images have been updated and moved from mundialis 
> organization to <https://hub.docker.com/r/osgeo/grass-gis/>.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, docker images have been updated and moved from the mundialis 
to the OSGeo organization at  <https://hub.docker.com/r/osgeo/grass-gis/>.
```

We have carried out quite some work in the GitHub Actions: 
we added support for "pre-commit" in order to reduce unnecessary 
runs of the automated checks, there were notable improvements in 
the code checking section and we have activated renovatebot 
to automatically maintain GitHub Actions.

Last but not least, we have significantly improved the automated

> release creation to reduce maintainers burden and we have 
> gained nine new contributors! Welcome!!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
release creation to reduce maintainer workload and we have 
gained nine new contributors! Welcome all!!
```

<a href="">
  <img src=""
   alt="GRASS GIS 8.3"
   title="GRASS GIS 8.3"
   width="60%" style="float:right;padding-left:15px;padding-top:20px">
</a>

### Full list of changes and contributors

For all 360+ changes, see our detailed announcement with the full list of
features and bugs fixed at

> [GitHub / Releases / 8.3.0RC1](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/releases/tag/8.3.0RC1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[GitHub / Releases / 8.3.0](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/releases/tag/8.3.0).
```

Thank you all contributors!!

## Download and test!

#### Binaries/Installers download

- Windows

>   - [64bit standalone installer]()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [64bit standalone installer](https://grass.osgeo.org/grass83/binary/mswindows/native/WinGRASS-8.3.0-1-Setup.exe)
```

- macOS
  - [Official Application Bundle](http://grassmac.wikidot.com/downloads)
- Linux

>   - [Debian](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/grass)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Debian](https://tracker.debian.org/pkg/grass)
  - [Ubuntu](https://launchpad.net/~ubuntugis/+archive/ubuntu/ubuntugis-unstable)
```

  - [Fedora/Centos/EPEL](https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/grass)
  - [Gentoo](https://packages.gentoo.org/packages/sci-geosciences/grass)

Further binary packages for other platforms and distributions will follow shortly,
please check at [software downloads](/download/software/index.html).

#### Source code download

- <https://grass.osgeo.org/grass83/source/>

> - <https://grass.osgeo.org/grass83/source/grass-8.3.0RC1.tar.gz>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <https://grass.osgeo.org/grass83/source/grass-8.3.0.tar.gz>
```

> - [From GitHub](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/releases/tag/8.3.0RC1)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [From GitHub](https://github.com/OSGeo/grass/releases/tag/8.3.0)
```
